Benefits of Artificial Intelligence for Accountants and Finance Professionals
New technology is changing the way people work in every industry. It's also changing the 
expectations clients have when working with companies. The same is true for accounting. Artificial 
intelligence can help accountants be more productive and efficient. An 80-90 per cent reduction in 
the time it takes to do tasks will allow human accountants to be more focused on providing counsel 
to their clients. Adding artificial intelligence to accounting operations will also increase the quality 
because errors will be reduced.
When accounting firms adopt artificial intelligence to their practise, the firm becomes more attractive 
as an employer and service provider to millennials and Gen Z professionals. This cohort grew up 
with technology, and they will expect prospective employers to have the latest technology and 
innovation to support not only their working preferences of flexible schedules and remote locations 
but also to free them up from mundane tasks that machines are better suited to complete. As clients, 
millennials and Gen Zers will determine who to do business with based on the service offerings 
they can provide. As more accounting firms adopt artificial intelligence, they will be able to provide 
the data insights made possible by automation while those who don’t commit to the technology will 
not be able to compete.
Robotic process automation (RPA) allows machines or AI workers to complete repetitive, timeconsuming tasks in business processes such as document analysis and handling that are plentiful 
in accounting. Once RPA is in place, time accountants used to spend on these tasks is now 
available for more strategic and advisory work. Intelligent automation (IA) is a more sophisticated 
version of RPA. IA can mimic human interaction in many cases, such as understanding inferred 
meaning in client communication and using historical data to adapt to an activity. There are multiple 
applications of RPA and IA in accounting work.
AI can often provide real-time status of financial matters since it can process documents using 
natural language processing and computer vision faster than ever making daily reporting possible 
and inexpensive. This insight allows companies to be proactive and adjust course if the data show 
unfavourable trends.
Automated authorization and processing of documents with AI technology will enhance several 
internal accounting processes including procurement and purchasing, invoicing, purchase orders, 
expense reports, accounts payable and receivables, and more.
In accounting, there are many internal corporate, local, state and federal regulations that must be 
followed. AI-enabled systems help support auditing and ensure compliance by being able to monitor 
documents against rules and laws and flag those with issues. Fraud costs companies collectively 
billions of dollars each year and financial services companies have $2.92 in costs for every dollar 
of fraud. Machine learning algorithms can quickly sift through enormous amounts of data to discern 
potential fraud issues or suspicious activity that might have been otherwise missed by humans and 
flag it for further review.
It seems like the only barrier to artificial intelligence adoption in accounting is getting people on 
board with the change. Nearly 85 per cent of executives understand that AI will help their 
companies attain or sustain a competitive advantage according to a study from The Boston 
Consulting Group and MIT Sloan School of Management. Since the chief executives seem to 
understand the importance of artificial intelligence, it just requires a mindset shift from the 
accounting professionals to accept the changes. With an assist from AI-enabled systems, 
accountants are freed up to build relationships with their clients and deliver critical insights.
To help accountants accept and hopefully embrace the tech addition to accounting firms, it's vital 
that the benefits of automation and artificial intelligence are shared with them and they are provided 
with the proper training and any support necessary to learn how best to use AI to their advantage.
AI and automation in accounting and finance are just beginning. However, the technology is getting 
more sophisticated, and the tools and systems available to support accounting are expanding at a 
rapid pace. Accountants that resist these changes will not be able to keep up with others who have 
the advantage of time and cost savings and insights AI can provide